a huge obstacle to getting humanitarian
Aid into Gaza are the Border checks
Israel insists on making before trucks
are allowed to enter supplies arrive in
Egypt on cargo ships at Port s or by
plane at Alish airport Aid trucks due to
enter Gaza are then checked by Israeli
authorities at Nana then cross back into
Egypt where they head to the Rafa
crossing the last time any truck was
allowed to pass through Rafa was
February the 4th or they go to the is
really controlled Karam Abu salm
Crossing for inspection and to enter
from there now before the War Began
around 500 trucks a day crossed into
Gaza through kamam Abu salm but almost
none are getting through now we can
speak to Alex dwall who's the executive
director at the world peace foundation
and he's also the author of mass
starvation the history and future of
famine joining us from Somerville
massachus thanks for your time with us
on Al jazer you recently wrote a piece
in which you said there's no inst since
the second world war in which an entire
population has been reduced to extreme
hunger and destitution with such speeds
can you elaborate on that and tell us
what you're basing it
on so I've been studying uh famine and
particularly man-made famine the use of
starvation as a war crime for 40 years
I've looked at cases around the world
Yemen
Ethiopia um Sudan Syria and the the that
are most obviously comparable in recent
history are the sieges of of Syrian
cities by the Assad regime but nothing
is
comparable in terms of the speed and the
the concentrated effort destroying what
is essential to sustain uh the life of
people Nothing Compares To to Gaza over
the last 75 years and the speed of
deterioration of humanitarian conditions
is absolutely terrifying would you say
that this is a sort of a byproduct of
the war or is it a direct result of
Israel's declared policy I mean we heard
from uh the the the uh one of the
ministers back in October who declared
that there will be no electricity no
food no water uh to enter Gaza and what
we see more recently is at certain
border crossings Israel settlers uh are
are preventing food and humanitarian aid
from entering
Gaza certainly there there's no doubt
that um certain senior members of the
Israeli government and certain groups
within Israeli Society have the intent
of starving Gaza what is absolutely
clear also is that the military actions
undertaken by the Israeli Defense Forces
have that predictable and knowable
effect and really at this stage it
doesn't really matter what is the the
the ultimate intent whether the
international court of justice will find
that Israel is responsible for the crime
of genocide or not what we know now is
that they are knowingly pursuing
military actions in the full knowledge
that this will be the outcome the the
famine Review Committee and the highest
International humanitarian assessment
body made that determination back in
December that if conditions if their
military tactics did not change unless
there was a full spectrum of relief
operations Gaza would be in famine the
international court of justice um three
weeks ago gave instructions to Israel
that it had to do certain things it has
done nothing of that so it is knowingly
creating these conditions and
undoubtedly that is unlawful right and
you also say that unless Israel changes
course which you just kind of alluded to
that they haven't since that icj ruling
then it could be legally culpable for
Mast starvation and you also say if the
US and UK fail to use every possible
lever to stop the catastrophe they then
will be complicit my question is in two
parts as an occupying power uh what what
are the Israeli government's duties
first of all in ensuring civilians have
access to food and water
and what can the US what should the US
and UK do to avoid uh their complicity
well Israel is under an absolute
obligation regardless of whether it's an
occupying power or not of complying with
what the icj said and and the particular
provision there is that it is inflicting
on the group that is Palestinians in
Gaza conditions of Life calculated to
bring about their physical destruction
and it had to desist from doing that and
it has three week it has had three weeks
to begin to do that and on the contrary
it has intensified its activities now
next week it has the Israel has to
report to the icj on the actions that it
has taken and clearly the report um will
not be satisfactory and then it will be
in breach of additional U obligations
that it has under international law and
then that brings the United States in
particular into a very very um certain
legal position because it may find as
the United States that it has been
complicit in uh crimes possibly the
crime of genocide and certainly in
enabling Israel to to violate the
instructions of the
icj and and quite apart from the the the
absolute horrors of the of of the destru
of the the people of Gaza and everything
that sustains life there that this
brings us into very perilous Uncharted
uh legal and political territory okay
we'll leave it there we thank you so
much uh Alex Deval for joining us from
Massachusetts thank
you thank you